# Introduction

## What is this book about?

This book is not about the theory behind operating systems, or how any specific
OS works. For the first we recommend Modern Operating Systems by Andrew
Tanenbaum [@ostanenbaum]. For the second the internet is your friend.

This book is a practical guide to writing your own operating system. It is
designed to not give too much away with samples and code excerpts, but still
give enough help with the technical details. We've tried to collect parts of
the vast (and often excellent) expanse of material and tutorials out there, on
the web and otherwise, and add our own insights into the problems we
encountered and struggled with.

The starting chapters are naturally quite detailed and explicit, to quickly get
you into coding. Later chapters give more of an outline of what is needed, as
more and more of the implementation and design becomes up to the reader, who
should now be more familiar with the world of kernel development. At the
end of some chapters there are links for further reading, which might be
interesting and give a deeper understanding of the topics covered.

## The reader

The reader of this book should be comfortable with UNIX/Linux, systems
programming and the C language in general. This book is of course also a great
way to get started learning those things, but it will be tougher going,
especially where we implicitly make use of them. Google and other tutorials are
often helpful.

## Credits, thanks and acknowledgements

We'd like to thank the OSDev community [@osdev] for their great wiki and
helpful members, and James Malloy for his eminent kernel development tutorial
[@malloy]. We'd also like to thank our supervisor Torbj√∂rn Granlund for his
insightful questions and our interesting discussions.

TODO: perhaps "number munchers".

Most of the CSS formatting of the book is based on the work by Scott Chacon for
the book Pro Git, <http://progit.org/>.

## Changes and corrections

This book is hosted on Github - if you have any suggestions, comments or
corrections, just fork the book, write your changes, and send us a pull
request. We'll happily incorporate anything that makes this book better.

## License

All content is under the [Creative Commons Attribution Non Commercial Share
Alike 3.0 license](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/us/).
